_tutos/15-artico3.md, before:

---
title: "HW/SW code generation for MPSoCs"
permalink: /tutos/artico3/
toc: true
---

The following topics are covered in this tutorial:

* design and development of ARTICo³'s applications (with automatic code generation).

Prerequisite: 

* [Tutorial Introduction](/tutos/intro)
* [ARTICo³ - Framework Components and APIs](https://des-cei.github.io/tools/artico3).

###### Tutorial created the 07.23.2020 by [L. Suriano](mailto:leonardo.suriano@upm.es)

## Introduction

In order to despatch jobs on HW on the FPGA, we are making use of ARTICo³, an open-source runtime reconfigurable processing architecture to enable hardware-accelerated high-performance embedded computing. It provides (among the other features):

 * a HW architecture to dispatch jobs, send and receive data,  among multiple accelerators
 * a set of APIs to manage the HW accelerators
 * a framework to create the bitstreams for the FPGA 
 
 For more details (documentation and tutorials), please visit its [official website](https://des-cei.github.io/tools/artico3).

By describing the architecture (i.e., the set of CPUs and the set of accelerators), PREESM automatically generates the application code.

The application selected for this tutorial is a Matrix Multiplication. A tutorial for the HW accelerators' synthesis is available [here](https://des-cei.github.io/tools/artico3/tutorials/matmul). However, few modifications were necessary to allow a further parameter-input. The code is also provided within the instruction of this tutorial.

## Initial project setup

### 1 Clone the ARTICo3 repository

 1. clone the ARTICo³ repository and switch to the branch `a9c93c1`
 
 ```
$ git clone https://github.com/des-cei/artico3
$ cd artico3/
$ git checkout a9c93c1
 ```

## Deployment

Under construction.

Commit message:

[TUTO 14] Adding HW source files

_tutos/15-artico3.md, after:

---
title: "HW/SW code generation for MPSoCs"
permalink: /tutos/artico3/
toc: true
---

The following topics are covered in this tutorial:

* design and development of ARTICo³'s applications (with automatic code generation).

Prerequisite: 

* [Tutorial Introduction](/tutos/intro)
* [ARTICo³ - Framework Components and APIs](https://des-cei.github.io/tools/artico3).

###### Tutorial created the 07.23.2020 by [L. Suriano](mailto:leonardo.suriano@upm.es)

## Introduction

In order to despatch jobs on HW on the FPGA, we are making use of ARTICo³, an open-source runtime reconfigurable processing architecture to enable hardware-accelerated high-performance embedded computing. It provides (among the other features):

 * a HW architecture to dispatch jobs, send and receive data,  among multiple accelerators
 * a set of APIs to manage the HW accelerators
 * a framework to create the bitstreams for the FPGA 
 
 For more details (documentation and tutorials), please visit its [official website](https://des-cei.github.io/tools/artico3).

By describing the architecture (i.e., the set of CPUs and the set of accelerators), PREESM automatically generates the application code.

The application selected for this tutorial is a Matrix Multiplication. A tutorial for the HW accelerators' synthesis is available [here](https://des-cei.github.io/tools/artico3/tutorials/matmul). However, few modifications were necessary to allow a further parameter-input. The code is also provided within the instruction of this tutorial.

## Download HW source file

The hardware accelerator was created using High-Level Synthesis (HLS).  The source file can be download from their repository:

```
git clone https://github.com/leos313/flexible_GSZIE_matmul

```

Although the bitstreams are already provided (this way, it will be easier to complete the tutorial in a few minutes), the repo contains all the files you need to re-run the synthesis from scratch. Specifically, you can find the HLS source code and an application to test the bitstream just created.

The step to follow are described in detail within the ARTICo³ website already provided.

## Initial project setup

### 1 Clone the ARTICo3 repository

 1. clone the ARTICo³ repository and switch to the branch `a9c93c1`
 
 ``` 
$ git clone https://github.com/des-cei/artico3
$ cd artico3/
$ git checkout a9c93c1
 ```

## Deployment

Under construction.
